                                                          CERN-PH-TH/2008-136

           Review of the Safety of LHC Collisions

                      LHC Safety Assessment Group
              John Ellis1, Gian Giudice1, Michelangelo Mangano1,
                      Igor Tkachev2 and Urs Wiedemann1
                  1
                     Theory Division, Physics Department, CERN,
                          CH 1211 Geneva 23, Switzerland
         2
           Institute for Nuclear Research of Russian Academy of Sciences,
                               Moscow 117312, Russia



                                    Abstract

The safety of collisions at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) was studied in
2003 by the LHC Safety Study Group, who concluded that they presented no
danger. Here we review their 2003 analysis in light of additional experimental
results and theoretical understanding, which enable us to confirm, update and
extend the conclusions of the LHC Safety Study Group. The LHC reproduces
in the laboratory, under controlled conditions, collisions at centre-of-mass
energies less than those reached in the atmosphere by some of the cosmic rays
that have been bombarding the Earth for billions of years. We recall the rates
for the collisions of cosmic rays with the Earth, Sun, neutron stars, white
dwarfs and other astronomical bodies at energies higher than the LHC. The
stability of astronomical bodies indicates that such collisions cannot be
dangerous. Specifically, we study the possible production at the LHC of
hypothetical objects such as vacuum bubbles, magnetic monopoles, microscopic
black holes and strangelets, and find no associated risks. Any microscopic black
holes produced at the LHC are expected to decay by Hawking radiation before
they reach the detector walls. If some microscopic black holes were stable, those
produced by cosmic rays would be stopped inside the Earth or other
astronomical bodies. The stability of astronomical bodies constrains strongly
the possible rate of accretion by any such microscopic black holes, so that they
present no conceivable danger. In the case of strangelets, the good agreement of
measurements of particle production at RHIC with simple thermodynamic
models constrains severely the production of strangelets in heavy-ion collisions
at the LHC, which also present no danger.




                                        1
1 - Introduction

The controlled experimental conditions offered by accelerators permit the detailed
study of many natural phenomena occurring in the Universe. Many of the
fundamental particles, such as muons, pions and strange particles, were first
discovered among the cosmic rays, and were subsequently studied with
accelerators. As the energies of accelerators have increased, they have also revealed
many heavier and less stable particles, such as those containing heavier quarks, as
well as the carrier particles of the weak interactions. Though not present in ordinary
stable matter, these particles played important roles in the early history of the
Universe, and may still be important today in energetic astronomical bodies such as
those producing the cosmic rays.

The energies of accelerators have been increasing regularly over the past decades,
though they are still far below those of the most energetic cosmic rays. With each
increase in accelerator energy, one may ask whether there could be any risk
associated with new phenomena that might be revealed. It has always been
reassuring that higher-energy cosmic rays have been bombarding the Earth since its
creation with no disastrous side-effects. On the other hand, the particles produced
in cosmic-ray collisions typically have different velocities with respect to the Earth
from those produced by accelerators, so the circumstances are not directly
comparable. The question has therefore been asked whether Earth's immunity to
cosmic-ray collisions also applies to accelerator collisions.

The Large Hadron Collider (LHC) accelerator is nearing completion at CERN. It is
designed to collide pairs of protons each with energies of 7 TeV (somewhat more
than 7000 times the rest mass-energy of the proton), and pairs of lead nuclei each
with energies of about 2.8 TeV per proton or neutron (nucleon). Though
considerably higher than the energies of previous accelerators, these energies are
still far below those of the highest-energy cosmic-ray collisions that are observed
regularly on Earth. In light of safety questions about previous accelerators, and in
advance of similar questions about the LHC, the CERN management requested a
report on the safety of the LHC by the LHC Safety Study Group, a panel of
independent experts, which was published in 2003 [1]. This report concluded that
there is no basis for any conceivable threat from the LHC.

The advent of LHC operations now revives interest in safety questions, so the
CERN management has commissioned us to review the arguments presented in the
2003 report and previous studies of the possible production of new particles, and to
update them in light of experimental results from the Brookhaven relativistic
heavy-ion collider (RHIC), in particular, as well as of recent theoretical speculations
about new phenomena.

We consider all the speculative scenarios for new particles and states of matter that
have been discussed in the scientific literature and raise potential safety issues. Our
methodology is based on empirical reasoning using experimental observations, and
hence could be extended to other exotic phenomena that might be cause for
concerns in the future.

We focus our attention mainly on two phenomena of current interest, namely the
possible production of microscopic black holes, such as might appear in certain
theoretical models featuring additional dimensions of space, and the possible
production of ‘strangelets', hypothetical pieces of matter analogous to conventional



                                          2
nuclei, but containing also many of the heavier strange quarks. These were both
considered carefully in the 2003 report of the LHC Safety Study Group [1]. Their
conclusions for strangelets, obtained in connection with heavy-ion collisions, apply
with equal or greater force to proton-proton collisions at the LHC.

In the case of microscopic black holes, there has been much theoretical speculation
since 2003 about their existence and their possible experimental signatures, as
reviewed in [2], where references may be found. In the case of strangelets, detailed
experimental measurements at the Brookhaven National Laboratory’s Relativistic
Heavy-Ion Collider (RHIC) of the production of particles containing different
numbers of strange quarks [3] enable one to refine previous arguments that, in the
event they exist, strangelets would be less likely to be produced at the LHC than at
RHIC.

Before discussing these two hypothetical phenomena in more detail, we first review
in Section 2 estimates of the rates of collisions of high-energy cosmic rays with
different astronomical bodies, such as the Earth, Sun, and others. We estimate that
the Universe is replicating the total number of collisions to be made by the LHC
over 1013 times per second, and has already done so some 1031 times since the origin
of the Universe. The fact that astronomical bodies withstand cosmic-ray
bombardment imposes strong upper limits on many hypothetical sources of
danger. In particular, as we discuss in Section 3, neither the creation of vacuum
bubbles nor the production of magnetic monopoles at the LHC is a case for concern.

In the case of the hypothetical microscopic black holes, as we discuss in Section 4, if
they can be produced in the collisions of elementary particles, they must also be
able to decay back into them. Theoretically, it is expected that microscopic black
holes would indeed decay via Hawking radiation, which is based on basic physical
principles on which there is general consensus. If, nevertheless, some hypothetical
microscopic black holes should be stable, we review arguments showing that they
would be unable to accrete matter in a manner dangerous for the Earth [2]. If some
microscopic black holes were produced by the LHC, they would also have been
produced by cosmic rays and have stopped in the Earth or some other
astronomical body, and the stability of these astronomical bodies means that they
cannot be dangerous.

In the case of the equally hypothetical strangelets, we review in Section 5 the data
accumulated at RHIC on the abundances and velocities of strongly-interacting
particles, including those containing one or more strange quarks, produced at RHIC
and in previous heavy-ion collision experiments [3]. All these data are very
consistent with a simple thermodynamic production mechanism that depends only
on the effective temperature and the net density of baryons (nucleons). The effective
temperature agrees well with first-principles theoretical calculations, and the net
density of baryons decreases as the energy increases, again in agreement with
theoretical calculations. Calculations for heavy-ion collisions at the LHC give a
similar effective temperature and a lower net density of baryons than at RHIC. This
means that the LHC could only produce strangelets at a lower rate, if they exist at
all.

We conclude by reiterating the conclusion of the LHC Safety Group in 2003 [1]:
there is no basis for any conceivable threat from the LHC. Indeed, theoretical and
experimental developments since 2003 have reinforced this conclusion.




                                          3
2 – The LHC compared with Cosmic-Ray Collisions

The LHC is designed to collide two counter-rotating beams of protons or heavy
ions. Proton-proton collisions are foreseen at an energy of 7 TeV per beam. An
equivalent energy in the centre of mass would be obtained in the collision of a
cosmic-ray proton with a fixed target such as the Earth or some other astronomical
body if its energy reaches or exceeds 108 GeV, i.e., 1017 eV [4]. When the LHC attains
its design collision rate, it will produce about a billion proton-proton collisions per
second in each of the major detectors ATLAS and CMS. The effective amount of
time each year that the LHC will produce collisions at this average luminosity is
about ten million seconds. Hence, each of the two major detectors is expecting to
obtain about 1017 proton-proton collisions over the planned duration of the
experiments.

As seen in Fig. 1, the highest-energy cosmic rays observed attain energies of around
1020 eV, and the total flux of cosmic rays with energies of 1017 eV or more that hit
each square centimeter of the Earth’s surface is measured to be about 5x10–14 per
second [5]. The area of the Earth’s surface is about 5x1018 square centimeters, and
the age of the Earth is about 4.5 billion years. Therefore, over 3x1022 cosmic rays
with energies of 1017 eV or more, equal to or greater than the LHC energy, have
struck the Earth’s surface since its formation. This means [6] that Nature has
already conducted the equivalent of about a hundred thousand LHC experimental
programmes on Earth already – and the planet still exists.




Fig. 1: The spectrum of ultra-high-energy cosmic rays, as measured by several experiments
[5]. Every cosmic ray with an energy shown in this plot, namely above 1017 eV, liberates in
its collision with the atmosphere more energy in its centre-of-mass frame than does a proton-
proton collision at the LHC.

Other astronomical bodies are even larger. For example, the radius of Jupiter is
about ten times that of the Earth, and the radius of the Sun is a factor of ten larger
still. The surface area of the Sun is therefore 10,000 times that of the Earth, and
Nature has therefore already conducted the LHC experimental programme about
one billion times [6] via the collisions of cosmic rays with the Sun – and the Sun still
exists.




                                             4
Moreover, our Milky Way galaxy contains about 1011 stars with sizes similar to our
Sun, and there are about 1011 similar galaxies in the visible Universe. Cosmic rays
have been hitting all these stars at rates similar to collisions with our own Sun. This
means that Nature has already completed about 1031 LHC experimental
programmes since the beginning of the Universe. Moreover, each second, the
Universe is continuing to repeat about 3x1013 complete LHC experiments. There is
no indication that any of these previous “LHC experiments” has ever had any
large-scale consequences. The stars in our galaxy and others still exist, and
conventional astrophysics can explain all the astrophysical black holes detected.

Thus, the continued existence of the Earth and other astronomical bodies can be
used to constrain or exclude speculations about possible new particles that might be
produced by the LHC.


3 – Vacuum Bubbles and Magnetic Monopoles

These large rates for the collisions of cosmic rays at energies higher than the LHC
imply directly that there can be no danger to the Earth from the production of
bubbles of new vacuum or magnetic monopoles at the LHC [1].

It has often been suggested that the Universe might not be absolutely stable,
because the state that we call the ‘vacuum’ might not be the lowest-energy state. In
this case, our ‘vacuum’ would eventually decay into such a lower-energy state.
Since this has not happened, the lifetime before any such decay must be longer than
the age of the Universe. The possible concern about high-energy particle collisions
is that they might stimulate the production of small ‘bubbles’ of such a lower-
energy state, which would then expand and destroy not just the Earth, but
potentially the entire Universe.

However, if LHC collisions could produce vacuum bubbles, so also could cosmic-
ray collisions. This possibility was first studied in [7], and the conclusions drawn
there were reiterated in [8]. These bubbles of new vacuum would have expanded to
consume large parts of the visible Universe several billion years ago already. The
continued existence of the Universe means that such vacuum bubbles are not
produced in cosmic-ray collisions, and hence the LHC will also not produce any
vacuum bubbles.

There have also been suggestions over the years that there might exist magnetic
monopoles, particles with non-zero free magnetic charge. As was originally pointed
out by Dirac, any free magnetic charge would be quantized, and necessarily much
larger in magnitude than the electric charge of the electron or proton. For this
reason, searches for magnetic monopoles have looked for heavily-ionizing particles
as well as for quanta of magnetic charge, and this search will be continued at the
LHC.

In some grand unified theories, though not in the Standard Model of particle
physics, magnetic monopoles might also catalyze nucleon decay, by transforming
protons and neutrons into electrons or positrons and unstable mesons. In this case,
successive collisions with large numbers of nuclei would release considerable
energy. The magnetic monopoles that might have such properties are expected to
weigh 1015 GeV or more, far too heavy to be produced at the LHC. Nevertheless,
here we consider the possibility of producing light proton-eating magnetic
monopoles at the LHC.




                                          5
A quantitative discussion of the impact of such magnetic monopoles on Earth was
presented in [1], where it was concluded that only a microgram of matter would be
destroyed before the monopole exited the Earth. Independently of this conclusion,
if monopoles could be produced by the LHC, high-energy cosmic rays would
already have created many of them when striking the Earth and other astronomical
bodies. Since they would have large magnetic charges, any monopoles produced by
cosmic rays would have been stopped by the material of the Earth [2]. The
continued existence of the Earth and other astronomical bodies after billions of
years of high-energy cosmic-ray bombardment means that any monopoles
produced could not catalyze proton decay at any appreciable rate. If the collisions
made in the LHC could produce dangerous monopoles, high-energy cosmic rays
would already have done so.

The continued existences of the Earth and other astronomical bodies such as the
Sun mean that any magnetic monopoles produced by high-energy cosmic rays must
be harmless. Likewise, if any monopoles are produced at the LHC, they will be
harmless.

4 – Microscopic Black Holes

As has already been discussed, the LHC will make collisions with a much lower
centre-of-mass energy than some of the cosmic rays that have been bombarding the
Earth and other astronomical bodies for billions of years. We estimate that, over the
history of the Universe, Nature has carried out the equivalent of 1031 LHC projects
(defined by the integrated luminosity for cosmic-ray collisions at a centre-of-mass
energy of 14 TeV or more), and continues to do so at the rate of over 1013 per
second, via the collisions of energetic cosmic rays with different astronomical
bodies.

There is, however, one significant difference between cosmic-ray collisions with a
body at rest and collisions at the LHC, namely that any massive new particles
produced by the LHC collisions will tend to have low velocities, whereas cosmic-
ray collisions would produce them with high velocities. This point has been
considered in detail [2] since the 2003 report by the LHC Safety Study Group [1]. As
we now discuss, the original conclusion that LHC collisions present no dangers is
validated and strengthened by this more recent work.

We recall that the black holes observed in the Universe have very large masses,
considerably greater than that of our Sun. On the other hand, each collision of a pair
of protons in the LHC will release an amount of energy comparable to that of two
colliding mosquitos, so any black hole produced would be much smaller than those
known to astrophysicists. In fact, according to the conventional gravitational theory
of General Relativity proposed by Einstein, many of whose predictions have
subsequently been verified, there is no chance that any black holes could be
produced at the LHC, since the conventional gravitational forces between
fundamental particles are too weak.

However, there are some theoretical speculations that, when viewed at very small
distances, space may reveal extra dimensions. In some such theories, it is possible
that the gravitational force between pairs of particles might become strong at the
energy of the LHC.

As was pointed out 30 years ago by Stephen Hawking [9], it is expected that all
black holes are ultimately unstable. This is because of very basic features of
quantum theory in curved spaces, such as those surrounding any black hole. The



                                          6
basic reason is very simple: it is a consequence of quantum mechanics that particle-
antiparticle pairs must be created near the event horizon surrounding any black
hole. Some particles (or antiparticles) disappear into the black hole itself, and the
corresponding antiparticles (or particles) must escape as radiation. There is broad
consensus among physicists on the reality of Hawking radiation, but so far no
experiment has had the sensitivity required to find direct evidence for it.

Independently of the reasoning based on Hawking radiation, if microscopic black
holes were to be singly produced by colliding the quarks and gluons inside protons,
they would also be able to decay into the same types of particles that produced
them [10]. The reason being that in this case they could not carry any conserved
quantum number that is not already carried by the original quarks and gluons, and
their decay back to the initial state partons would be allowed. For this reason, a
microscopic black hole cannot be completely black. In standard quantum physics,
the decay rate would be directly related to the production rate, and the expected
lifetime would be very short. The case of pair production of black holes carrying
new and opposite conserved quantum numbers leads to similar conclusions: only
their ground state is guaranteed to be stable, and any further accretion of normal
matter in the form of quarks, gluons or leptons would immediately be radiated
away. Both this and the existence of Hawking radiation are valid in the extra-
dimensional scenarios used to suggest the possible production of microscopic black
holes.

One might nevertheless wonder what would happen if a stable microscopic black
hole could be produced at the LHC [2]. However, we reiterate that this would
require a violation of some of the basic principles of quantum mechanics – which is
a cornerstone of the laws of Nature – in order for the black hole decay rate to be
suppressed relative to its production rate, and/or of general relativity – in order to
suppress Hawking radiation.

Most black holes produced at the LHC or in cosmic-ray collisions would have an
electric charge, since they would originate from the collisions of charged quarks. A
charged object interacts with matter in an experimentally well-understood way. A
direct consequence of this is that charged and stable black holes produced by the
interactions of cosmic rays with the Earth or the Sun would be slowed down and
ultimately stopped by their electromagnetic interactions inside these bodies, in spite
of their initial high velocities. The complete lack of any macroscopic effect caused
by stable black holes, which would have accumulated in the billions during the
lifetime of the Earth and the Sun if the LHC could produce them, means that either
they are not produced, or they are all neutral and hence none are stopped in the
Earth or the Sun, or have no large-scale effects even if they are stopped.

If a black hole were to be produced by a cosmic ray, as it traveled through the Earth
it would absorb preferentially similar numbers of protons and neutrons, because
their masses are larger than that of the electron. It would, therefore, develop and
maintain a positive charge, even if it were produced with no electric charge. The
standard neutralization process due to the quantum creation of particle-antiparticle
pairs near the horizon – the Schwinger mechanism – relies on principles very
similar to those at the basis of Hawking radiation, and would likely not operate if
the latter was suppressed. Thus, combining the hypotheses that black holes are
simultaneously neutral and stable and accrete matter requires some further
deviation from basic physical laws. There is no concrete example of a consistent
scenario for microphysics that would exhibit such behaviour. Furthermore, it is
possible [2] to exclude any macroscopic consequences of black holes even if such
unknown mechanisms were realized, as we now discuss.



                                          7
The rate at which any stopped black hole would absorb the surrounding material
and grow in mass is model-dependent. This is discussed in full detail in [2], where
several accretion scenarios, based on well-founded macroscpic physics, have been
used to set conservative, worst-case-scenario limits to the black hole growth rates in
the Earth and in denser bodies like white dwarfs and neutron stars. In the extra-
dimensional scenarios that motivate the existence of microscopic black holes (but
not their stability), the rate at which absorption would take place would be so slow
if there are seven or more dimensions that Earth would survive for billions of years
before any harm befell it. The reason is that in such scenarios the size of the extra
dimensions is very small, so small that the evolution driven by the strong extra-
dimensional gravity forces terminates while the growing black hole is still of
microscopic size. If there are only five or six dimensions of space-time relevant at
the LHC scale, on the other hand, the gravitational interactions of black holes are
strong enough that their impact, should they exist, would be detectable in the
Universe.

In fact, ultra-high-energy cosmic rays hitting dense stars such as white dwarfs and
neutron stars would have produced black holes copiously during their lifetimes.
Such black holes, even if neutral, would have been stopped by the material inside
such dense stars. The rapid accretion due to the large density of these bodies, and to
the strong gravitational interactions of these black holes, would have led to the
destruction of white dwarfs and neutron stars on time scales that are much shorter
than their observed lifetimes [2]. The final stages of their destruction would have
released explosively large amounts of energy, that would have been highly visible.
The observation of white dwarfs and neutron stars that would have been destroyed
in this way tells us that cosmic rays do not produce such black holes, and hence
neither will the LHC.

To conclude: in addition to the very general reasoning excluding the possibility that
stable black holes exist, and in particular that they could only be neutral, we
therefore have very robust empirical evidence either disproving their existence, or
excluding any consequence of it.

5 - Strangelets

The research programme of the CERN Large Hadron Collider also includes the
collisions of ultra-relativistic lead and other nuclei (ions). The main scientific goal of
this heavy-ion programme is to produce matter at the highest temperatures and
densities attainable in the laboratory, and to study its properties. This programme is
expected to produce, in very small quantities, primordial plasma of the type that
filled the Universe when it was about a microsecond old.

The normal matter of which we are made, and which constitutes all the known
visible matter in the Universe, is composed of the two lightest types of quarks, the
up and down quarks. Heavier, unstable quarks have been discovered in cosmic-ray
collisions and at accelerators, and the lightest of these is the strange quark. Particles
containing strange quarks have been produced regularly in the laboratory for many
decades, and are known to decay on time scales of the order of a nanosecond, or
faster. Such lifetimes are characteristic of the weak interaction responsible for
radioactivity, which governs their decay. Some unstable particles containing two or
three strange quarks have also been observed. Particles including one strange quark
have been shown to bind to nuclei, the so-called hypernuclei, which are however
unstable and promptly decay, again with nanosecond time scales. Apart from




                                            8
rapidly decaying nuclei with two particles each containing one strange quark [11],
no nuclei containing multiple strange quarks are known.

Strange quark matter is a hypothetical state of matter, which would consist of large,
roughly equal numbers of up, down and strange quarks. Hypothetical small lumps
of strange quark matter, having atomic masses comparable to ordinary nuclei, are
often referred to as strangelets. As discussed in more detail in the Appendix, most
theoretical studies of strangelets conclude that, if they exist, they must be unstable,
decaying with a typical strange-particle lifetime of around a nanosecond. In this
case, any production of strangelets would pose no risk. However, it has been
speculated that strange quark matter might weigh less than conventional nuclear
matter with the same number of up and down quarks, but not for atomic numbers
smaller than 10. In this very hypothetical case, such a strangelet would be stable. It
has been further speculated that, if produced, strangelets could coalesce with
normal matter and catalyze its conversion into strange matter, thereby creating an
ever-growing strangelet. This hypothetical scenario underlies concerns about
strangelet production at accelerators, which were discussed previously in [8] and
[1].

It is generally expected that any stable strangelet would have a positive charge, in
which case it would be repelled by ordinary nuclear matter, and hence unable to
convert it into strange matter [8], see [12], however. In some model studies, one
finds that negatively-charged strangelets can also exist, but are unstable since the
positively-charged states have lower energy [13]. However, there is no rigorous
proof that the charge of a stable strangelet must be positive, nor that a negatively-
charged strangelet cannot be metastable, i.e., very long-lived. So, one should also
consider the possibility of a negatively-charged stable or very long-lived strangelet.

Prior to the start of the Relativistic Heavy-Ion Collider (RHIC), a study was carried
out [8] to assess hypothetical scenarios for the production of strangelets in heavy-
ion collisions. Additional arguments were given in [14], and a reassessment of such
a possibility was given in the 2003 Report of the LHC CERN Safety Study Group
[1]. We revisit here this topic in light of recent advances in our understanding of the
theory and experiment of heavy-ion collisions. These enable us to update and
strengthen the previous conclusions about hypothetical scenarios based on
strangelet production. More details of our considerations on strangelet production
at the LHC are given in the appendix.

The 2003 report summarized the status of direct experimental searches and of
theoretical speculations about hypothetical strangelet production mechanisms [1].
More recently, additional direct upper limits on strangelet production have been
provided by experimental searches at RHIC [15] and among cosmic rays [16], which
have not yielded any evidence for the existence of strangelets. In the near future,
additional experimental information may be expected from strangelet searches in
samples of lunar soil and from particle detectors in outer space [17].

On the theoretical side, the 2003 report considered three mechanisms for strangelet
production [1]: i) a thermal mechanism [3], in which particles are produced as if
from a heat bath in thermal equilibrium, ii) a coalescence mechanism, in which
particles produced in a heavy-ion collision might combine at late times to form a
strangelet, and iii) a distillation mechanism [18], which was proposed as a specific
model for strangelet production. According to this last mechanism, a hot quark-
gluon plasma with large net baryon number is produced in heavy-ion collisions,
and is enriched in strangeness as it cools down by emitting predominantly particles
containing strange antiquarks.



                                          9
As discussed in the Appendix, no evidence has been found in the detailed study of
heavy-ion collisions at RHIC for an anomalous coalescence mechanism. In
particular, the production rate of light nuclei measured in central Au+Au collisions
at RHIC [14], is consistent with the coalescence rates, used in the 2003 Report of the
LHC CERN Safety Study Group [1] to rule out strangelet production. There is also
considerable experimental evidence against the distillation mechanism. For this
mechanism to be operational, the produced matter should have a long lifetime and
a large net nucleon density. However, experiments at RHIC confirm the general
expectations that the net nucleon density is small and decreases at higher collision
energies. Moreover, the plasma produced in the collision is very short-lived,
expanding rapidly at about half the velocity of light, and falling apart within 10–23
seconds [19]. Furthermore, no characteristic difference has been observed in the
production of particles containing strange quarks and antiquarks. Hence, a
distillation mechanism capable of giving rise to strangelet production is not
operational in heavy-ion collisions at RHIC, and this suggestion for strange-particle
production has been abandoned for the LHC. On the other hand, as reviewed
below, RHIC data strongly support models that describe particle production as
emission from a high-temperature heat bath [3].

If they exist, strangelets would be bound states that would be formed initially with
an atomic number comparable to that of normal nuclei. Like normal nuclei,
strangelets would also contain a significant baryon number. We know from the
basic principles of quantum mechanics that, for a strangelet to be formed, its
constituents must be assembled in a configuration that contains less than its
characteristic binding energy. If this were not the case, the forces between the
constituents would not be strong enough to hold them together, and the strangelet
would not form. As a consequence, strangelet formation is less likely if the
constituents have initially more kinetic energy, and specifically if they emerge from
a hotter system. Correspondingly, strangelet production is less likely in a hotter
system.

The energy needed to break up a strangelet is similar to that needed to break up a
normal nucleus, which is of the order of one to a few million electron volts. Similar
energies would be reached in a heat bath with a temperature of ten to several tens
of billions of degrees Celsius. However, heavy-ion collisions are known to produce
heat baths that are far hotter, reaching temperatures exceeding 1 trillion degrees
Celsius [3]. Basic thermodynamics would require most strangelets to melt in such a
heat bath, i.e., dissociate into the known strange particles that decay within a
nanosecond. For this reason, the likelihood of strangelet production in relativistic
heavy-ion collisions can be compared to the likelihood of producing an icecube in a
furnace.

The analogy of heavy-ion collisions with a particle furnace has been supported by
many detailed measurements in accelerator collisions of the production of different
types of particles, including those containing one, two or three strange quarks. Fig.
2 shows one such piece of evidence: the relative rates at which particles are
produced in heavy-ion collisions at RHIC is in line with a theoretical calculation
assuming a furnace with a temperature around 1.6 trillion degrees [3]. All particle
ratios are well-described, including rare particles like the Omega baryon, which
contains three strange quarks and which – if compared to the most abundant
particles such as pions - is produced only at the per-mille level (see Fig. 2).
Supplementary information is provided in the Appendix.




                                         10
Fig. 2: The relative amounts of different particles and antiparticles produced at RHIC in the
collisions of Gold nuclei with energies sNN = 200 GeV per nucleon-nucleon collision. All
the measurements (red points) agree very well with a simple thermal model (blue lines) with
an effective temperature around 1.6 trillion degrees, in line with theoretical calculations,
and a net nucleon (quark) density that is lower than in previous, lower-energy experiments.
The inset shows that the fraction
                             ! of strange quarks has saturated at the same density as up
and down quarks. Figure taken from refs. [3,23].

The total number of heavy-ion collisions created at the LHC will be comparable to
the total number of heavy ion collisions created at RHIC. The LHC will be at least as
hot a furnace as RHIC, in the sense that the systems produced in heavy-ion
collisions at the LHC will have an effective temperature that is similar to that
produced at RHIC. This is one factor that makes strangelet production no more
likely at the LHC than at RHIC. Another major factor pointing in the same direction
is that the net density of nucleons, measured by the baryon number, will be lower
at the LHC than at RHIC. This is because the system produced in heavy-ion
collisions at the LHC is spread over a larger rapidity range, and the same total net
baryon number will be spread over a larger volume. As discussed in more detail in
the Appendix, this effect has already been seen at RHIC, where the net density of
nucleons is lower than in lower-energy experiments, and this trend will continue at
the LHC [3]. Since strangelets require baryon number to be formed, this effect
makes strangelet production less likely at the LHC than at RHIC.

We conclude on general physical grounds that heavy-ion collisions at the LHC are
less likely to produce strangelets than the lower-energy heavy-ion collisions already
carried out in recent years at RHIC, just as strangelet production at RHIC was less
likely than in previous lower-energy experiments carried out in the 1980s and 1990s
[8].

Knowing that strangelet production at the LHC is less likely than at previous lower-
energy machines, we now review the arguments that strangelet production in
previous lower-energy experiments did not pose any conceivable risk.



                                             11
It has been shown that the continuing survival of the Moon under cosmic-ray
bombardment ensures that heavy-ion collisions do not pose any conceivable threat
via strangelet production [8]. This is because cosmic rays have a significant
component of heavy ions, as does the surface of the Moon. Since the Moon, unlike
planets such as the Earth, is not protected by an atmosphere, cosmic rays hitting the
Moon have produced heavy-ion collisions over billions of years at energies that are
comparable to or exceed those reached in man-made experiments.

The conclusion reached in [8] required two well-motivated assumptions. Since
high-energy cosmic rays include many iron nuclei, which are also prevalent in the
Moon’s surface, it was assumed that the conditions reached in iron-iron collisions
are comparable to those reached in the collisions of gold ions or lead ions that had
been studied previously in the laboratory. Secondly, since RHIC and LHC
experiments take place in the centre-of-mass reference frame, whereas in cosmic-ray
collisions the centre-of-mass frame is moving at high speed, it was necessary to
make some assumption about the velocity distribution of any strangelets produced.
We recall that high-velocity strangelets might well be broken up by lunar matter
before becoming slow enough to coalesce with it.

Since the appearance of [8], the RHIC heavy-ion programme has also studied the
collisions of the copper ions, which are closely comparable to iron-iron collisions.
The abundances of particles produced in these collisions are described by the same
thermal model of a particle furnace that accounts successfully for particle
production in gold-gold collisions. Moreover, the velocity distributions of all
particle species observed at RHIC are similar to or broader than the distribution
assumed in [8]. These observations support the assumptions made in [8], and
therefore strengthen their conclusions.

An independent safety argument, which does not require any assumption about the
velocity distribution of any hypothetical strangelets, has been given in [20]. The rate
of cosmic-ray heavy-ion collisions in interstellar space is known. If these collisions
produced any strangelets, these would have accreted in stars and any large-scale
coalescence would have resulted in stellar explosions that have not been seen. This
complementary argument does, however, assume that any strangelets produced do
not decay on a time scale much shorter than that of star formation.

We close this section by summarizing that the successful description of heavy-ion
collisions as a particle furnace with a net density of baryons that decreases at higher
energies implies that strangelet production at the LHC is less likely than at lower-
energy machines (see appendix). The arguments given previously for the safety of
lower-energy collisions are strengthened by recent observations at RHIC.
Furthermore, we note that the analogy of the LHC with a hot particle furnace will
be monitored from the earliest days of heavy-ion collisions at the LHC. A thousand
heavy-ion collisions would already suffice for a first test of the thermal model
which describes heavy-ion collisions as a particle furnace. This will be among the
first data analyses done in the LHC heavy-ion programme, and will immediately
provide an experimental confirmation of the basic assumptions on which the safety
argument is based.

6 – Conclusions

Having reviewed the theoretical and experimental developments since the previous
safety report was published, we confirm its findings. There is no basis for any
concerns about the consequences of new particles or forms of matter that could
possibly be produced by the LHC.



                                          12
In the case of phenomena, such as vacuum bubble formation via phase transitions
or the production of magnetic monopoles, which had already been excluded by the
previous report [1], no subsequent development has put into question those firm
conclusions. Stable and neutral black holes, in addition to being excluded by all
known theoretical frameworks, are either excluded by the stability of astronomical
bodies, or would accrete at a rate that is too low to cause any macroscopic effects on
timescales much longer than the natural lifetime of the solar system. The previous
arguments about the impossibility to produce strangelets at the LHC are confirmed
and reinforced by the analysis of the RHIC data.

We have considered all the proposed speculative scenarios for new particles and
states of matter that currently raise safety issues. Since our methodology is based on
empirical reasoning based on experimental observations, it would be applicable to
other exotic phenomena that might raise concerns in the future.




                                         13
Appendix
In Section 5 we state that there is no basis for any conceivable threat from strangelet
production at the LHC. Our arguments follow closely the line of reasoning of
previous reports [8], but they put particular emphasis on two observations. First, on
general grounds, the probability for strangelet production decreases with increasing
center-of-mass energy. As a consequence, strangelet production at LHC is less likely
than at RHIC, just as it was less likely at RHIC than in the heavy-ion programs at
lower center-of-mass energies pursued in the 1980s and 1990s. Secondly, RHIC
data strongly disfavour models of particle production which were advocated as
production mechanisms for strangelets. On the contrary, RHIC data give strong
support to a thermal model of particle production, which puts tight upper bounds
on strangelet production. In this Appendix, we provide background information to
support these statements and the main conclusions drawn from them. In particular,
we recall the main arguments of the safety reports [8], and we discuss how these
arguments can be strengthened in the light of recent data from RHIC.

Strangelet properties

Strange quark matter is a hypothetical state of matter consisting of roughly equal
numbers of up, down and strange quarks. It has been speculated that strange quark
matter might constitute the true ground state of baryonic matter, being more stable
than ordinary nuclei [21,22]. Hypothetical small lumps of strange quark matter,
having atomic masses comparable to ordinary nuclei, are often referred to as
strangelets. Such strangelets might be either stable or metastable. At present, a first
principle theory of strange quark matter is not within theoretical reach. It would
require major theoretical breakthroughs in the application of QCD to finite density
and to mesoscopic systems. As a consequence, theoretical studies on whether
strangelets can exist for some parameter range depend on model-dependent
assumptions. As reviewed in detail in ref. [8], theoretical speculations about the
existence of strangelets may be summarized as follows:

   1. It is unclear whether bulk strange quark matter exists at all.

   2. It is unclear whether bulk strange quark matter can be stable. If it does exist,
      strange quark matter may be absolutely stable in bulk at zero external
      pressure, though the expected values for the relevant parameters tend to
      disfavour stability [1].

   3. Finite size effects make it very unlikely that small strangelets (A < 10) can be stable
      or long-lived. Even if bulk strange quark matter is stable, finite-size effects
      (surface tension and curvature) significantly destablize strangelets with low
      baryon number. For typical parameters, it has been estimated that finite-size
      effects add, e.g., 50 MeV per baryon for A = 20 and 85 MeV per baryon for
      A=10 [1].

   4. Stable strangelets, if they exist, could be present only in states of low entropy (i.e.,
      temperature). Hot strangelets are much less stable than cold ones. The
      characteristic scale to decide what is hot or cold is set by the binding energy
      per baryon of the strangelet. On general thermodynamic grounds, the time-
      scale for evaporation of hot strangelets is expected to be very small, though
      difficult to calculate. Assuming typical nuclear binding energies of O(1)
      MeV, one expects that stable strangelets need to be much colder than the
      matter produced in heavy-ion collisions [1,8].



                                             14
   5. If stable strangelets exist, they are most likely positively charged. If strange matter
      contained equal numbers of u, d and s quarks, it would be electrically
      neutral. Since, s quarks are heavier, Fermi gas kinematics alone indicates that
      strange quarks are suppressed, giving strange matter a positive charge per
      unit baryon number. However, the effects of gluon exchange reactions are
      difficult to quantify. Perturbatively, gluon exchange is repulsive and
      increases the mass. But gluon interactions weaken as quark masses are
      increased, so the gluonic repulsion is smaller between s-s, s-u or s-d pairs
      than between u and d quarks. Hence, increasing the strength of gluon
      interactions makes the charge of quark matter negative, but it also unbinds it.
      Unreasonably low values of the bag constant are necessary to compensate for
      a large repulsive gluonic interaction energy, which is why negatively-
      charged strangelets are regarded as extremely unlikely [8].

Hypothetical disaster scenarios based on strangelet production in heavy-ion
collisions require that strangelets be stable or very long-lived, and hence that they
are sufficiently cold. It has been argued in detail [8] that each of these conditions is
unlikely. In the following, we discuss in particular how RHIC data allow us to
strengthen the argument that sufficiently cold strangelets cannot be produced in the
hot particle furnace created in a heavy ion collision. Moreover, most hypothetical
disaster scenarios require that the produced strangelet be charged negatively, so
that its fusion with positively charged nuclei could lead to a hypothetically
disastrous chain of events. In contrast, in normal matter, positively-charged
strangelets would capture electrons, which would shield any fusion with other
nuclei. To trigger a run-away reaction in the latter case, one must invoke an
ionizing mechanism, e.g., by transporting the strangelets to the interior of the Sun
[12], and this adds another layer of unlikely assumptions.

Strangelet production mechanisms in heavy-ion collisions

Strangelets, if they exist at all, are hadronic systems made out of quarks. Any model
for their production should be first tested against the existing data on the
production of nuclei. This line of argument has been explored in ref. [1]. Here, we
sharpen its conclusions in the light of recent data from RHIC. There are three
models of particle production, which have been considered in the context of
strangelet production in heavy-ion collisions.




                                            15
Fig. 3: Comparison of the experimental data on different particle multiplicity ratios
obtained at RHIC in Gold-Gold collisions at sNN = 130 GeV with thermal model
calculations [23]. The abundances of strange and multiple strange hadron species are well-
described in terms of a chemical freeze-out temperature and baryon chemical potential µB.
We note that the freeze-out temperatures here and in Fig. 2, corresponding to sNN = 200
                                        !
GeV, are very similar, whereas the baryon chemical potential decreases with sNN . Other
data on the dependences of these parameters on the center-of-mass energy are shown in Fig.
4.
                                                                     !
                                                                    !

     1. Thermal models
Hadron production in heavy-ion collisions is remarkably well described in terms of
a statistical model. This model describes hadron yields in terms of the grand
canonical ensemble of a hadron resonance gas at temperature T and baryon
chemical potential µB [3], which characterizes the net baryon density. Figures 2 and
3 illustrate the success of this model for particle production in heavy-ion collisions
at RHIC. The relative abundance of all particle species with ns strange quarks
(where experimental observations extend up to ns = 3 only), are well described by
the model. The temperature T and baryochemical potential µB of this model show a
characteristic dependence on the center-of-mass energy of the heavy-ion collision,
as seen in Fig. 4. The temperature increases with increasing collision energy,
saturating at T ! 165 MeV, whereas the baryon chemical potential µB decreases. This
is reflected in the reduction as the center-of-mass energy increases in the rate of
production of ! baryons, which contain three strange quarks, as can be seen by
comparing Figs. 2 and 3. The reason for the decrease of µB is that, at higher collision
energies, the same net baryon number is distributed over a wider longitudinal
kinematic range, resulting in a lower net baryon density and hence a lower value of
µB .


                                           16
Fig. 4: Thermal model fits at mid-rapidity of the freeze-out temperature T and the baryon
chemical potential µB as functions of the center-of-mass energy sNN . The data points up to
RHIC energies are taken from ref. [23]. The points at sNN = 5.5 TeV are based
extrapolations of the measured trend [24]. The decrease of baryon chemical potential with
center-of-mass energy makes strangelet production less likely at higher center-of-mass
                                                      !
energies.
                                                     !
The statistical approach can also be applied to the production of complex nuclei.
The penalty factor for the yield YA of a nucleus A compared to A-1 is the ratio of
Boltzmann weights [1]

                                   YA        $ ( m " µB ) '
                           PF =         # exp&" N         ),                     (1)
                                  YA "1      %     T      (

where mN is the nucleon mass. For the relevant temperature of T = 165 MeV, a small
baryon chemical potential µB << mN as shown in Fig. 4, and A = 10, this gives a
                 !
relative suppression   factor 3 " 10-25 compared to the production of nucleons. We
note that this would be the suppression factor for the production of normal nuclei.
The production of any strangelet of A = 10 may be expected to be suppressed
significantly more than the production of a normal A = 10 nucleus. Moreover, the
grand canonical ensemble, on which the above estimates are based, is expected to
be modified by an additional canonical suppression factor, as soon as the constraint
from the finite total baryon number in the collision becomes relevant at sufficiently
large A. Taking these considerations into account, the suppression factor 3 " 10-25 is
an extremely conservative upper bound. If one repeats the exercise with A = 20, one
is led to a suppression factor 10-49.

We note that the production of light nuclei with A << 10 has been measured in
central heavy-ion collisions at AGS, SPS and RHIC. It is well accounted for by the
penalty factor in eq. (1): see, e.g. ref. [25] for a comparison of thermal model
calculations to data. The measured penalty factors for light nuclei range from 1/50
at AGS, to about 1/300 at the SPS, and for antinuclei they range from 1/(2 " 105) at


                                              17
the AGS and 1/3000 at the SPS to 1/1500 at RHIC [1]. As functions of center-of-
mass energy, the penalty factors increase for nuclei but, due to the decrease of the
baryon chemical potential with sNN , they decrease for antinuclei. In a system with
postive net baryon number, the total yield of nuclei is always larger than the yield
of antinuclei. For this reason, the above estimate is based on the thermal production
of nuclei.
                         !
2. Coalescence models

The basic physics idea of coalescence models is that a nucleus A forms when A
nucleons occupy the same interaction volume. In these models, the yield YA of
nuclei A is related to the initial yield YN of nucleons as
                                               A
                                 YA = BA (YN ) ,                           (2)

where BA is the so-called coalescence parameter. The penalty factor PF for
coalescing an additional nucleon onto an existing cluster is then [1]
                       !
                                 Y    # B & V
                           PF = A = % A ( 0 YN .                      (3)
                                YA "1 $ BA "1 ' 0 V

Here, V denotes the interaction volume over which coalescence is effective, and the
subscript ‘0’ refers to a reference scale set, e.g., by determining the coalescence
parameter and the!interaction volume at a specific collision energy.

It has been emphasized previously in ref. [1] that predictions from the coalescence
models are in qualitative and even reasonable quantitative agreement with thermal
models. For instance, in ref. [1] it was estimated on the basis of coalescence models
that the suppression factor for production of an A = 20 nuclei in a central heavy ion
collision is between 10-53 and 10-46. This compares very well with the suppression
factor of order 10-49 obtained in the above discussion of thermal models.

Since coalescence models do not differ qualitatively from thermal models, the same
safety arguments apply. For this reason, we emphasize in the text that in the
detailed study of heavy-ion collisions at RHIC and lower energies, no evidence for
an anomalous coalescence mechanism has been found. The basis of the 2003 report
has been fully vindicated by further RHIC running.


3. Distillation mechanism

Strangeness distillation has been proposed specifically as a mechanism for
strangelet production. This mechanism assumes that a baryon-rich quark-gluon
plasma is produced in a heavy-ion collision, which cools by evaporation from its
surface. Due to the large baryon chemical potential in this plasma, an s antiquark
would be more likely to pair with a u or d quark, than an s quark with a u or d
antiquark. As a consequence, the cooling of the plasma would lead to an excess of s
quarks in a baryon-rich lump, which may finally become a strangelet.
                                                                !
We note that this production process would be more likely for              ! baryon
                                                                     ! large
chemical potential, and thus would be less likely for heavy-ion collisions at the
LHC than at lower center-of-mass energies. Moreover, there is by now significant
empirical evidence against a dynamical picture of heavy-ion collisions in which
strangeness distillation could be operational. In particular, empirical evidence from


                                          18
RHIC strongly supports explosive production scenarios, in which, for instance,
collective-flow gradients increase with center-of-mass energy [26]. The short
lifetime of the produced systems (of the order of 10 fm/c) is not expected to allow
for an evaporation process. Moreover, the explosive collective dynamics is expected
to favor bulk emission rather than surface emission [26]. So, there is no evidence for
a distillation mechanism capable of strangelet production at RHIC, and this
suggestion for strange particle production has been abandoned for the LHC.

Direct experimental searches for strangelets

Strangelets have been searched for in ordinary matter on Earth [27] and in heavy-
ion collisions over a wide range of center-of-mass energies. In particular, searches
for stra
lets have been reported by several experiments at the Brookhaven Alternating
Gradient Synchrotron [28], by the NA52 Collaboration at the SPS [29], and by the
STAR Collaboration at RHIC [15]. All of these searches yielded negative results and
reported complementary upper limits. In particular, STAR reported an upper limit
of less than 10-6 strangelets per central Au-Au collision for strangelets with lifetimes
larger than 0.1 ns and mass larger than 30 GeV. More details about the experimental
situation can be found in the previous reports [1,8].

Summary of the safety argument

1. Quantitative considerations

The maximal luminosity of lead-lead (Pb+Pb) collisions at the LHC is L = 1027 cm-2 s-
1
  . With a hadronic Pb+Pb cross section of 8 barn, this implies a rate of up to 8000
Pb+Pb collisions per second. With a foreseen running time of 1 month per year (106
seconds) times a duration of the program of, say, 10 years, we arrive at a
conservative upper bound on the total number of ion-ion collisions at the LHC of
O(1011). However, a large fraction of the hadronic Pb+Pb cross section is diffractive
or very peripheral. Only 10 percent of the entire rate can be considered as being
sufficiently central for creating a collision system characteristic of a heavy-ion
collision with a number of participants Npart > 20. As a consequence, a conservative
bound on the number of heavy ion collisions relevant for production of an A = 10
nucleus is O(1010).

Our conservative estimate for the thermal production of a normal A = 10 nucleus at
the LHC was 3 " 10-25 times the rate of nucleon production. Taking the latter rate to
lie in the hundreds, we arrive at a probability of 10-13 that a single normal nucleus
of size A = 10 is produced during the entire LHC program as a result of the
essentially thermal dynamics in a heavy ion collision. So, if LHC would run for the
entire lifetime of the Universe, the probability of producing such a single nucleus
via thermal production would be 1/10001.

We note that the above is an estimate for the thermal production of a normal A = 10
nucleus from a hadron gas of temperature T = 165 MeV. The production of normal
nuclear matter provides an extremely conservative upper bound on the production
of strange quark matter. For this reason, we find that the significant empirical
support for thermal particle production in heavy ion collisions, which was
substantiated further by RHIC data in recent years, strengthens the main conclusion

1
  One may add that in semi-peripheral collisions, nuclei with A = 10 may appear amongst the break-
up products of the spectators of the nuclear projectile. However, such fragment production of
nuclear remnants is not a mechanism that could give rise to strangelets. For this reason, we focus
solely on thermal production rates of normal nuclei.



                                               19
of the 2003 report [1]. There is no basis for any conceivable threat from strangelet
production at the LHC.

2. Qualitative considerations

The above estimate of an upper limit to the probability of A = 10 nuclei can be
further strengthened by the following qualitative argument, which is based on
general principles of thermodynamics alone.

      Strangelets are cold, dense systems. Like nuclei, they are bound by O(1-10) of
MeV (if they are bound at all). Heavy-ion collisions produce hot systems. At LHC,
the temperatures reached are in excess of 100 MeV. The second law of
thermodynamics fights against the condensation of a system an order of magnitude
colder than the surrounding medium. The hypothetical production of a cold
strangelet from a hot hadron gas has been compared to producing an ice cube in a
furnace [8].

        This paper has aimed at communicating this central qualitative idea. In this
appendix, we have provided the quantitative background, to which the notion of
“particle furnace” corresponds. As seen from Fig. 4, measurements show that
heavy-ion collisions reach temperatures of T = 160 MeV in the last stage of the
collision. Moreover, the baryon chemical potential, which characterizes the net
quark density, decreases as the center-of-mass energy increases, further decreasing
the likelihood of producing any system with large atomic number. The particle
abundances measured at RHIC and in lower-energy experiments are consistent
with expectations from the thermal model of statistical hadronization (see Fig. 3).
This model is also known to apply to the production of light nuclei, as far as they
have been identified experimentally, and it provides a very large suppression factor
for the production of A = 10 nuclei. On these grounds, we conclude that the
experimental evidence from RHIC for the thermal model of particle production
significantly strengthens the conclusions of the 2003 report of the LHC Safety Study
Group.




                                        20
Bibliography

[1] J.P. Blaizot et al., Report of the LHC safety study group, CERN-2003-001.

[2] S.B. Giddings and M.L. Mangano, CERN-PH-TH/2008-025, arXiv:0806.3381, to
appear in Phys. Rev. D.

[3] P. Braun-Munzinger, K. Redlich and J. Stachel, in Quark-Gluon Plasma, eds. R.C.
Hwa and X.-N. Wang, (World Scientific Publishing, Singapore, 2003), also available
as arXiv:nucl-th/0304013.

[4] In comparing the LHC with cosmic rays, here and elsewhere we assume the
validity of special relativity. It has been tested accurately in the laboratory for
particles with velocities similar to those of any new exotic particles that could be
produced at the LHC, and there is no suggestion that special relativity is
inapplicable to cosmic rays with energies comparable to that of the LHC.

[5] Pierre Auger Collaboration (J. Abraham et al.), Science 318, 938 (2007); Pierre
Auger Collaboration (A.A. Watson et al.), Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A588, 221 (2008);
HiRes Collaboration (R. Abbasi et al.), Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, 101101 (2008); R.U.
Abbasi et al. arXiv:0804.0382 [astro-ph]; D.R. Bergman and J.W. Belz, J.Phys., G34,
R359 (2007).

[6] This estimate would be reduced by a factor approximately equal to A if all the
ultra-high-energy cosmic rays were nuclei with an atomic number A, since the
cosmic-ray spectrum falls like 1/E3 at high energies, as seen in Fig. 1.

[7] I.Yu. Kobzarev, L.B. Okun, M.B. Voloshin, Yad. Fiz. 20, 1229 (1974) [Sov. J. Nucl.
Phys. 20, 644 (1975)]; P. Frampton, Phys. Rev. Lett. 37, 1378 (1976); P. Hut and M.J.
Rees, Print 83-0042 (IAS, Princeton) (1983); P. Hut, Nucl. Phys. A418, 301C (1984).

[8] W. Busza et al., Rev. Mod. Phys. 72, 1125 (2000).

[9] S.W. Hawking, Commun. Math. Phys. 43, 199 (1975).

[10] G. ‘t Hooft, Int. J. Mod. Phys. A 11, 4623 (1996).

[11] H. Takahashi et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 87, 212502 (2001) and Nucl. Phys. A721, 951
(2003).

[12] It has been speculated that if an unknown mechanism exists that could
transport strangelets produced by an accelerator to the interior of the Sun, then
positively-charged strangelets might also grow inside the Sun: A. Kent, hep-
ph/0009130v2.

[13] X.J. Wen, Int. J. Mod. Phys. A22, 1649 (2007).

[14] H. Liu, Int. J. Mod. Phys. E16, 3280 (2008).

[15] B.I. Abelev et al. [STAR Collaboration], Phys. Rev. C76, 011901 (2007).

[16] SLIM Collaboration, S. Cecchini et al., arXiv:0805.1797.

[17] J. Madsen, astro-ph/0612740.




                                           21
[18] C. Greiner, P. Koch and H. Stoecker, Phys. Rev. Lett. 58, 1825 (1987).

[19] The RHIC White Papers, Nucl. Phys. A757, 1 (2005).

[20] A. Dar, A. De Rujula, U. Heinz, Phys. Lett. B470, 142 (1999).

[21] A.R. Bodmer, Phys. Rev. D4, 1601 (1971).

[22] E. Witten, Phys. Rev. D30, 272 (1984).

[23] A. Andronic, P. Braun-Munzinger and J. Stachel, Nucl. Phys. A772, 167 (2006).

[24] N. Borghini and U.A. Wiedemann, arXiv:0707.0564 [hep-ph].

[25] V.I. Kolesnikov [NA49 Collaboration], arXiv:0710.5118 [nucl-ex].

[26] M.A. Lisa, S. Pratt, R. Soltz and U. Wiedemann, Ann. Rev. Nucl. Part. Sci. 55,
357 (2005).

[27] R. Klingenberg, J. Phys. G27, 475 (2001); P. Mueller, L.B. Wang, R.J. Holt, Z.T.
Lu, T.P. O'Connor and J.P. Schiffer, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 022501 (2004); Z.T. Lu, R.J.
Holt, P. Mueller, T.P. O'Connor, J. P. Schiffer and L.B. Wang, Nucl. Phys. A754, 361
(2005).

[28] T.A. Armstrong et al. [E864 Collaboration], Phys. Rev. C63}, 054903 (2001); A.
Rusek et al. [E886 Collaboration], Phys. Rev. C54, 15 (1996); D. Beavis et al. [E878
Collaboration], Phys. Rev. Lett. 75, 3078 (1995); H. Caines et al. [E896
Collaboration], J. Phys. G27, 311 (2001).

[29] G. Appelquist et al. [NA52 (NEWMASS) Collaboration], Phys. Rev. Lett. 76,
3907 (1996); R. Arsenescu et al. [NA52 Collaboration], New J. Phys. 4, 96 (2002).




                                          22
