                                                                                           1


SPC REPORT ON LSAG DOCUMENTS

The CERN Scientific Policy Committee (SPC) was asked by the President of the CERN Council to
examine the documents produced by the LHC Safety Assessment Group (LSAG) and to provide
Council with an independent opinion on the conclusions stated in those documents. A dedicated
SPC panel was set up, composed of Peter Braun-Munzinger, Matteo Cavalli-Sforza, Gerard ‘t
Hooft, Bryan Webber and Fabio Zwirner. The documents made available to the panel were:
"Review of the Safety of LHC Collisions", by the LHC Safety Assessment Group (LSAG report);
"Astronomical Implications of Hypothetical Stable TeV-Scale Black Holes", by S.B.Giddings and
M.L.Mangano (GM paper). After thorough review, discussion and ensuing endorsement by the
full SPC, the requested opinion is summarized in the present document.

Introduction

When new accelerators such as the LHC are built, exploring higher energies than their
predecessors, it is legitimate to ask whether there is any danger related to the production
of new particles or states of matter not previously created artificially. Such a question
was already addressed in the past: by an ad hoc Committee for the Relativistic Heavy Ion
Collider at the Brookhaven National Laboratory (RHIC) in 1999, and by the LHC Safety
Study Group at CERN (LSSG) in 2003. Both reports concluded that there was no danger.
The following objects of concern were considered, with emphasis on the last two,
discussed in both reports: magnetic monopoles, vacuum bubbles, strangelets, black holes.

Concerns have recently been expressed on the possibility that microscopic, stable, neutral
black holes may be produced at the LHC and then accrete matter sufficiently fast to pose
a risk to Earth. This highly hypothetical possibility had already been excluded on the
basis of very strong arguments, and most experts of the field consider this scenario as
impossible. However, the LSAG report now provides, on the basis of the GM paper, a
much stronger safety proof, relying only on solid experimental facts and firmly
established theory, which should remove any residual concern. More generally, the
LSAG report reviews the previous safety studies in the light of additional experimental
results and theoretical understanding, and is able to confirm, update and extend the LSSG
conclusions as described below.

No other exotic particles whose existence has been discussed in the scientific literature
would pose any potential danger at the LHC. The methodology used by LSAG would be
applicable to the evaluation of possible risks associated with other exotic particles or new
states of matter that might be suggested in the future.

The LHC compared with cosmic-ray collisions

Section 2 of the LSAG report shows quantitatively that collisions of cosmic rays of the
highest energies with the Earth, the Sun and other astronomical bodies occur naturally at
energies equivalent to or larger than those of LHC collisions, and in numbers that exceed
them by extremely large factors. The results and the considerations given in this section
are the basis for the safety proofs given later in the paper.
                                                                                           2



The starting point of the proof is the observed and well-known flux (per square cm per
second) of cosmic rays at center-of-mass energies that exceed those at the LHC by one to
a few factors of 10. Considering the surfaces of the target planets and stars and their
observed age, it is easily shown that such energetic LHC-like cosmic rays have already
hit the Earth (or the Sun) in numbers equivalent to one hundred thousand (or one billion)
times the total number of collisions expected over the duration of LHC experiments.
Analogously, in the whole Universe, the equivalent of 3·1013 complete LHC experiments
are performed every second. As shown in the LSAG report, and reviewed below, the
hypothesis that the LHC operation would threaten the existence of the Earth is
irreconcilable with the fact that the Earth, the Sun and other objects in the Cosmos have
persisted for billions of years in spite of their continuous exposure to energetic cosmic
rays.

The comparison between cosmic ray collisions with target planets or stars and LHC
collisions makes use of special relativity. Special relativity has been tested accurately in
the laboratory for particles with velocities similar to and higher than the relative velocity
of the two relevant reference frames; moreover, the experimental data on cosmic rays at
energies up to more than an order of magnitude above the equivalent LHC energy are in
agreement with special relativity.

Vacuum bubbles and magnetic monopoles

We fully endorse the conclusions of the LSAG report concerning the possible production
of bubbles of new vacuum or magnetic monopoles, discussed in Section 3. The
continuous bombardment of the Earth and other astronomical bodies by cosmic rays at
centre-of-mass energies at and above that of the LHC means that such processes, if they
exist, have occurred and are still occurring at a high rate throughout the Universe.

In the case of vacuum bubbles, the velocity of the object, once formed, is not relevant as
it would have expanded and caused visible large-scale effects, whatever its state of
motion and wherever it appeared, even in distant galaxies. Therefore no such objects are
ever created within the energy range of cosmic ray collisions.

It is worth remarking in this context that head-on collisions between cosmic rays, at
centre-of-mass energies enormously greater than those that will ever be accessible in
Earth-based experiments, occur sufficiently frequently on cosmic scales that we can be
completely confident that catastrophic disruption of the vacuum will never be a
possibility at the LHC or any future accelerator.

In the case of magnetic monopoles, such objects could have been produced in cosmic ray
collisions, but they are by definition highly ionizing and would therefore have been
stopped inside the Earth or any other target body. The continuing existence of
astronomical bodies shows that, if produced, magnetic monopoles must be harmless.
                                                                                          3



Microscopic black holes

Section 4 of the LSAG report addresses potential dangers associated with the production
of microscopic black holes at the LHC. For the cases that were already considered in
previous reports, it confirms their conclusions that there is absolutely no danger. In
addition, Section 4 reviews the highly hypothetical production of neutral stable black
holes, and the possibility that these black holes could be trapped inside the Earth. While
such a possibility is dismissed by most of the experts, it is conceivable, and it could have
potentially dangerous consequences if these highly hypothetical, neutral, stable
microscopic black holes could accrete matter on Earth on time scales shorter than the
natural lifetime of the solar system. For this to occur, a number of increasingly unlikely
conditions should be satisfied: 1) the fundamental scale of gravity should be within the
LHC energy range, possible only if extra spatial dimensions with very peculiar
properties do exist; 2) Hawking radiation, and more general arguments for the decay of
any black holes produced at the LHC, should fail; 3) the Schwinger mechanism, by which
a charged black hole becomes electrically neutral via particle-antiparticle creation near
the horizon, should still work, even though it is based on physical principles very close to
those underlying Hawking radiation.

Going beyond the RHIC and LSSG reports, the above-mentioned possibility is now
directly addressed by the LSAG report, on the basis of the GM paper, which is the most
detailed and specialized presentation of all the scientific evidence we have on this issue.
The GM paper admits from the start the possibility that compelling but not
experimentally tested mechanisms, such as Hawking radiation, could be suppressed or
absent. It chooses instead a conservative or "worst-case" scenario at every instance where
an experimental or theoretical uncertainty is encountered. It then uses observational data
on cosmic rays and on astronomical objects such as the Sun or compact stars to exclude
any danger at the LHC.

In particular, at the LHC energy, any danger for the Earth on time scales lower than or
comparable to the natural lifetime of the solar system can be ruled out on the basis of its
contradiction with the observation of white dwarf stars of known mass, age and other
properties. This conclusion, while entirely valid for the LHC, would need further work to
be extended to conceivable future colliders of much higher energies. A powerful
argument applicable also to higher energies is formulated making reference to observed
neutron stars, but this argument relies on properties of cosmic rays and neutrinos that,
while highly plausible, do require confirmation, as can be expected in the coming years.

On the basis of all these findings, we can conclude that there is no danger of whatever
kind from the hypothetical production of black holes at the LHC.

Strangelets

Section 5 of the LSAG report deals with the possibility that particles containing strange
quark matter, so-called 'strangelets', could be created in Pb-Pb collisions at the LHC and,
                                                                                        4

if stable and negatively charged, could coalesce with normal matter to possibly catalyze
conversion of the world into strange matter. This case was already discussed in detail in
the RHIC and LSSG reports. There it was argued, as recalled in the LSAG report, that: a)
strangelet production at RHIC energies would be less likely than strangelet production in
nucleus-nucleus collisions at lower energies such as at the Brookhaven AGS and CERN
SPS accelerators; indeed, no trace of strangelet production was found in nearly a decade
of Pb-Pb or Au-Au collision experiments performed at high luminosity; b) high energy
cosmic rays bombarding the Moon for billions of years have yielded no evidence for
events connected with strangelet production.

The results from seven years of running the RHIC program have in fact provided
evidence that strangelet production is even less likely at the higher energy of the LHC.
They have yielded strong experimental support for the hypothesis that particles are
produced from a heat bath at a limiting temperature. The LSAG report shows that, on that
basis, strangelet production at the LHC energy, since it involves particles with baryon
number, will be less likely than at the lower RHIC energy. Hence, the data from the
RHIC program strongly reinforce the arguments collected at the start of the RHIC
program: there is no conceivable danger from strangelet production at LHC energy.

Conclusions

The LSAG report considered four specific objects of concern: magnetic monopoles,
vacuum bubbles, strangelets, black holes. For vacuum instability and magnetic
monopoles, the conclusions of previous reports are confirmed and, in the latter case,
reinforced. For strangelets, the conclusions of previous reports are confirmed and
reinforced by the analysis of RHIC data. For black holes, the LSAG report goes much
beyond previous reports, on the basis of the GM paper. Replacing some highly plausible
theoretical concepts of the previous reports with irrefutable observational data on cosmic
rays and on astronomical bodies such as the Sun or compact stars, interpreted using
firmly established theory, further layers of safety are added to the previously existing
ones, excluding any possibility that the highly hypothetical production of black holes at
the LHC could create a danger of whatever kind.

To summarize, we fully endorse the conclusions of the LSAG report: there is no basis for
any concerns about the consequences of new particles or forms of matter that could
possibly be produced at the LHC.
